.\" Manpage for kpatch-build.
.\" Contact udoseidel@gmx.de to correct errors or typos.
.TH man 1 "23 Mar 2014" "1.0" "kpatch-build man page"
.SH NAME
kpatch-build \- build script
.SH SYNOPSIS
kpatch-build [options] <patch file>
.SH DESCRIPTION
This script takes a patch based on the version of the kernel
currently running and creates a kernel module that will replace
modified functions in the kernel such that the patched code takes
effect.

.SH OPTIONS

-h|--help
   Show this help message

-a|--archversion
   Specify the kernel arch version

-r|--sourcerpm
   Specify kernel source RPM

-s|--sourcedir
   Specify kernel source directory

-c|--config
   Specify kernel config file

-v|--vmlinux
   Specify original vmlinux

-j|--jobs
   Specify the number of make jobs

-t|--target
   Specify custom kernel build targets

-n|--name
   Specify the name of the kpatch module

-o|--output
   Specify output folder

-d|--debug
   Keep scratch files in /tmp
   (can be specified multiple times)

--oot-module
   Enable patching out-of-tree module,
   specify current version of module

--oot-module-src
   Specify out-of-tree module source directory

-R|--non-replace
   Disable replace flag of KLP
   (replace is on by default)

--skip-cleanup
   Skip post-build cleanup

--skip-compiler-check
   Skips check that ensures that the system compiler version and
   the compiler version that built the kernel match.  Skipping this
   check is not recommended, but is useful if the exact compiler
   version is not available or is not easily installed. Use
   only when confident that the two versions of compiler output
   identical objects for a given target.  Otherwise, use of
   this option might result in unexpected changed objects
   being detected.

.SH SEE ALSO
kpatch(1)
.SH BUGS
No known bugs.
.SH AUTHOR
Udo Seidel (udoseidel@gmx.de)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2014: Seth Jennings <sjenning@redhat.com>, Copyright (C)
2013,2014:  Josh Poimboeuf <jpoimboe@redhat.com>

